And my audience is your audience.
Oh, this will be great.
I'll have them sent to you.
It would be in everybody's best interest.
No, no, no.
You'll see what I mean.
Oh, I'd be so grateful.
Read the editor's stories in each issue.
Here, let me show you what it looks like.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Look at this.
This is a series.
Yeah, this is a series.
When did it start?
We're going into our second year.
And how often is it?
A quarterly.
We're going to go bi-monthly.
Wow.
Oh, I'm thrilled.
This is so important.
I'll learn about it.
You'll see what I mean.
Oh, look at the, this is a cool world.
Let it be, boy.
Oh, this looks wonderful.
Tell me, by the way, when I'm running.
I'll have every copy sent to you.
Will you?
Yeah.
I'll write about it.
Great.
I promise.
The tape is back on.
Could you talk a little bit about
You mentioned how William Parallels Williams changed your life.
Oh, you'll see it in that book.
I wrote my thesis on the first two books of Patterson.
I got to meet him, I went on rounds with him, and I think if I hadn't met him,
I would have gone on to become a high school English teacher, which is what I envisioned myself as doing when I was a college senior.
Instead I went and took pre-med courses to try to follow his lead, at least the doctoring side of his life.
I never thought that I'd ever do any writing.
I pictured myself becoming a doctor.
And it was hard because I was not a very good pre-med student.
I had majored in English.
Somehow I got through medical school and then went into pediatrics.
But I kept visiting him, and he was an enormous influence on me.
And when I started doing my research, I'd send him some of the articles, and he'd write back and say for kind of loud, speak English!
Write for all of us folks out here, instead of he was attacking, in other words, the technical jargon of psychiatry and psychoanalysis.
He wanted me to write clearly for ordinary people, as you called them.
Which is something we continually see in professional academic writing, isn't it?
I see so many books published by universities that have so much promise, just by the title.
Right.
And then you pick it up and you go, hey boy!
Yeah, it's a sad— They're either talking to their colleagues and to a very few choice people.
It's a pity, because there is so much good material there to share.
That's right.
But is it just coincidental that also, I mean, William's position, writer, yourself, position, writer.
Walker Percy's position, writer.
Is there something there that we do?
Well, I think there is.
There are some of us who do that as well.
And I think it's no accident that both of them have meant so much to me, and that I've followed them with such a— Have you given any thought?
I mean, what is there that— I think I just am taken by their moral energy and their ability to not only—their ability to—you know, I think both of them address as physicians
the moral question of, what does life mean?
That's what a physician, not only wants to heal someone, but is face to face with these existentialist questions.
I think for some of us, this becomes a pride to our writing life, because we face hurt and the pain of people, and like all of us, we wonder, why is this?
and how what we lived, especially given the vulnerability of all of us, since we're all going to die anyway.
So I think maybe there's that existentialist side of medicine that the writer will connect with.
You mentioned the phrase deconstructionism earlier, you know, and then of course you've had the opportunity to know Williams and to know Prissy and also to know that it worked.
Have you learned different things from these people as individuals, as opposed to their writing, or is it, again, something that... In both of those instances, you know, sometimes you get to know people... I don't know if I'm phrasing the question, but I think... No, I know what you're saying.
Sometimes you get to know people and you're disappointed in them, even though they're well-known and have been very successful.
I was not disappointed in either of those individuals.
Did they amplify in life what you learned from their books?
The more I knew them, the more I learned about their books as well as about them.
And that, I think, is probably the highest compliment a reader can pay a writer.
Just say it once more, if you would.
The more I got to know them as individuals, the more impressed I was with not only the nature of their lives, but the more I learned from those lives about them as writers, and the more I learned about the meaning of their book,
So, there was a continuity and a connection between their individual lives and their writing lives, which I have found very impressive.
And in a way, that's what your letter shows.
That letter shows Walker Percy as a deeply concerned and responsive human being, trying to connect with someone who has reached out to him, offering him
you know, whatever responsiveness he has.
And you know, he wasn't doing this for anyone's benefit but that particular person.
And just by circumstances came into my possession.
There's something that you can, that letter belongs in The Movie Goer and in The Last Gentleman.
That letter is an aspect of what he's writing about in both of those novels.
I mean, what happens at the end of The Last Gentleman?
Now, Will Bowers running after that doctor.
And they're trying to come back.
And at the end of the moviegoer, you know, Binks is saying, here we are, we hand one another along, and that letter is, you know, the— I hadn't made that leap.
No, no, no.
That letter belongs in those books.
And I wonder if I had it tucked into that.
Well, whether we knew it consciously or not, it's one of those wonderful, fateful moments that a good novelist would always offer us.
Wow.
I didn't mean to—
take you away from the track that you might have been on, knowing them and knowing their works.
Knowing them and knowing their works, and knowing them helped me know their work even more.
Because, you know, they both lived this hour.
Walker struggled with the death, the suicide of his father, of his grandfather.
He struggled with illness that could have killed him, tuberculosis.
He knew what it meant to be an orphan at the age of thirteen or fourteen.
He knew what it was to suddenly be sidetracked by a potentially fatal illness, and out of this came the moral introspection that enabled these novels.
He tells you that in the letter, too.
And Williams, you know, Williams spent his life working with poor people in Patterson who had nothing but what he – they had nothing
by the standards of social and economic indices, but they had vitality, they had rhythms of language, they had an energy which he appreciated and responded to, and as a writer invoked and offered to the rest of us a huge gift, a huge gift to us readers, to understand
the story of Patterson, which is where the first factory in America was built.
I didn't know that.
Yeah.
I'm from Lowell, originally, of course.
First factory in America.
Oh, yeah.
And out of all—I mean, he gave us the story of America in Patterson, in poetry and also in prose, because there were very important prose sections of Patterson.
You know, I asked Harold Bloom, because he brought her up at one point, the famous Desert Island book.
He's the one person, I said, is there anything that you wanted to read that you've never read?
I said, nobody's asked me that, because of course I said, I've read everything.
How many people can say that?
He's actually had a heart attack and bleeding ulcers because he can't sleep and he reads all night.
But what book would he take with him to the Desert Island, you know?
And I guess he said, well, it would have to be either Shakespeare or the King James Bible or the Hebrew Bible.
Have you ever given thought about what books?
Only one book?
Well, I give you three or four.
Give me three or four.
I would take War and Peace.
Really?
Yeah.
I would take War and Peace.
I would take Middlemarch.
I would take the Bernanos, the Dietary of the Country Priest.
Now these are books you're going to read over and over again.
I do read them over and over again.
I've read one piece three times.
And what is it about those particular characters?
I think they are filled with wisdom, and they would give me the kind of perspective I'd need on it.
That's an island.
To keep going.
Wow.
How about if I pushed it to five, did you put a couple more of them?
If what?
If I said you could take five books.
I like the way this is going.
I just feel you're prioritizing for me, which is very interesting.
I would take Salone's Bread and Wine, which I teach and love.
I should send you my reading list.
Because those are basically the books that I do.
You're reading it from school?
Yeah, from my course.
I'm sorry.
No, no, no.
This is for a book, by the way.
I love doing this.
I'll send you a reading book.
Would you?
Would you see my book, which you'll get tomorrow.
When are you leaving for North Carolina?
Next week?
Next week.
Okay, I'll mail the thing today, because I'm going to go to the first book.
I would take bread and wine.
I would take, and I'd take the moviegoer.
No, in fact, I'd take the last gentleman.
Over the moviegoer.
Well, if you really pushed me, I'd take The Last Gentleman over the moviegoer.
Do you think that's his greatest book?
It's not his greatest book, but it's his wisest.
It's a further development of the kind of wisdom that gave us the moviegoer.
I think literary critics, using their criteria, would tell us that the moviegoer is a better novel, quotes, unquote.
But I'm responding, you see, out of my heart, in my own situation of a desert island,
I love this.
I'd also take, frankly, and I should take his, you know, The Message in the Bottle, because one of the essays is about a man standing that does an island trying to figure out the meaning of life and hoping for a message.
You know, the metaphor is that this earth is an island.
And they were looking for some meaning, you know, some bottle wall.
That's the message of the wall precisely.
Yeah.
And then, of course, the Thanatos Syndrome, the metaphor there is that he's up in the woods looking for fires, again, trying to protect and trying to... The reason I didn't give you, in a way, the stock answers, which would be the Bible and Shakespeare and whatever is... I don't know if it was wonderful.
...is because I'm trying to tell you that
I'm trying to give you books that I live by, you know.
And that goes back to what we were saying.
What we were talking about.
I'm looking for a quote here that I pulled out of a P.W.
interview you did about six or seven years ago.
Oh, yeah.
Thank you.
About how novelists are, how you live with novelists.
Yeah.
And otherwise it was that one quote there, and I would just kind of like to expand on that a little bit, you know.
I wouldn't have the exact quote to read to you.
I feel you'll see it on the call of stories, but I consider novelists companions.
in this life of search for meaning.
They are people who are wise observers of the human scene, and I find their wisdom terribly important and helpful.
And I read what they have to say, not only to be entertained and to be amused and to be engaged in that sense, but I feel that some of them move, as God reminded us, from the aesthetic plane to the moral plane.
And they do so in a way that is gripping and engaging and potentially life-changing.
I mean, I have just been re-reading The Magic Mountain.
I saw it.
I was going to ask you about it next to the Bonhoeffer book.
I've been reading The Magic Mountain, and I read it years ago, but I'm once again caught up in that world that Thomas Mann creates.
which is a world of the intellect, yes, but it's also a moral, it's the universe examined morally and exposed morally.
And I find it, you know, it's just an enchanting experience to be summoned this way by another human being, Thomas Mann, into this kind of reflection, which is basically moral and spiritual reflections.
Do you read any contemporary novels in your books?
Yeah.
I love, do you know Alice Elliot Dark?
I know.
She's a short story writer.
She did a wonderful story in New York about a man dying of AIDS.
Tobias Wolfe, I love his short fiction.
You just have a new collection already.
Yeah, I love his fiction.
I love Richard Ford's fiction, the short stories.
I love Independence Day.
Carver, I teach.
Obviously, yeah, but he's recently, what was that?
Ford, Wolfe, Alice Elliott-Dark.
I said Alice Elliott, G-A-R-K.
G-A-R-K.
She's had one question for her.
I'll check her out, yeah.
And then there's republished and double-take, you read a couple of her stories.
Well, tell me how you get into this double-take thing.
Oh, a couple years ago we got very—there is no way that the visual side is connected to the textual side.
There's no outlet for good narrative photography.
And I'll send you—if you read the reader's stories,
And I'll send you a piece that I wrote in the Chronicle of Higher Education that tells you the story of the magazine and how it got going.
In fact, it has to do with my wife as an elementary and secondary school teacher.
This is not going to be for this newspaper.
I'm going to send you a huge copy of this book.
This is remarkable.
This is great.
I see over there, I didn't see before, Joe DiMaggio and Lou Gehrig.
Yeah.
So you're a baseball fan.
My father used to take me to baseball games all the time.
He was the fan.
Uh-huh.
And they were his—that picture originally was my five, yeah.
And when he died, you know, it's my way of connecting with him.
That's wonderful.
They were my parents over there.
Yeah, I think it was a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit.
There are many other rooms.
I have a library about the side.
I have a basement where I can show you.
It's unbelievable!
Yeah, I'm going to have a—because really in this concluding section of my new book, the future of the book.
Do you think about that at all?
Oh, I hope that people will get to meet the people who—I mean, when you read a book, you're meeting a fellow human being.
You're meeting another life, and it's received wisdom, which is offered to you in the book.
A book, I keep repeating, is a form of companionship.
It's a human experience.
And even if you don't read this, getting back to what you were talking about, correcting books, this is your way of engaging the spirit of these books.
You don't have to read every word of them.
Well, Churchill said, is it?
necessary to have read all 50,000 books in my library so you can talk to me.
He said, no, but make them your friends.
Know what you have.
Know where they are when you need them.
And how they can help you.
And I call upon them in all the rooms in this house.
And they're alive.
Have you heard of this notion called hypertext and all this stuff with computers where there's interactivity where the reader can actually go in and change the story?
I mean, this is what
Well, that's right.
I mean, there's a new book I'll call The Future of the Book from the University of California Press.
I have two copies.
I'll send you one, if you're at all interested.
No, I'll order it.
I don't want to say that.
I've got one all marked up, because there was a big seminar, and it was Alberto Eco's group out in California, and there were all these people, and this one fellow talks about hypertext, which is
Oh yeah, like a novelist.
Yeah, and it's constantly changing, and the readers can go in.
And of course, because you can call these things up on computers.
And there is no sacred text.
Well, you know, I think we do this as readers all the time.
We do, but that's fine.
But you can't go change the text of what the writer has written.
Well, you change it in your mind.
But what you do is, it filters through your sensibility, and you write notes to yourself, or don't, but you absorb it in your own particular way.
That I agree with.
I mean, I don't agree with it.
It happens.
But to change it for other people, no.
Yeah.
And how will books be written?
How will they be accessed?
Well, I hope they'll always be available to us to sit and read it.
Yeah.
I don't want to take up too much of your time, but how long are you going to be in North Carolina?
Just for a couple of months.
Do you have an address down here, I reckon?
Yes.
I'll send the book here to you immediately today.
I think this has been a really good session.
What I'd like to do is go transcribe this tape.